..
   Athena document is copyright 2016 Bruce Ravel and released under
   The Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License
   http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/

Setting E0
==========

The :procparam:`e0` is central to many of the chores that
:demeter:`athena` performs.  Understanding how :procparam:`e0` is used
and how it is set is essential to understanding how :demeter:`athena`
operates and essential to using :demeter:`athena` well.

By default, :demeter:`athena` has :demeter:`ifeffit` determine
:procparam:`e0` and uses the value that :demeter:`ifeffit`
finds. :demeter:`ifeffit`'s algorithm is to find the first peak of the
first derivative of |mu| (E). To avoid settling on a spot in a noisy
pre-edge, :demeter:`ifeffit` makes a series of checks to verify that
its guess for :procparam:`e0` comes after several points in the
derivative of |mu| (E) that are increasing in energy and is followed
by several points that are decreasing. The details of this
implementation are such that :demeter:`ifeffit` often chooses a point
that is slightly to the high energy side of peak that a person would
choose, but it typically is a very good guess.

The actual  value of :procparam:`e0`  is used  for many things.  It is
compared to  a table of  edge energies to  determine the value  of the
:procparam:`Z`  and :procparam:`edge`  parameters.  It  is the  energy
reference for  the values of  the normalization, pre-edge,  and spline
range parameters. And  it is the edge energy  in the :demeter:`autobk`
algorithm.

The `calibration <../process/cal.html>`__ and `alignment
<../process/align.html>`__ tools can be used to refine the values for
:procparam:`e0`. You can also edit its value directly by typing in its
entry box. The right-click context menu for :procparam:`e0` and the
:guilabel:`Energy` menu have several options for other ways of setting
:procparam:`e0`.

There are a few situations where the default algorithm will fail. Very
noisy data can result in a spurious identification of
:procparam:`e0`. Materials which have two inflections in the edge,
such as zero-valent zirconium, might have the wrong inflection
chosen. Materials with huge edge peaks, such as K\ :sub:`2`\ CrO\
:sub:`4`, will have a point in the leading edge of the peak chosen
rather than a point in the main edge.

.. versionadded:: 0.9.18 features related to E\ :sub:`0` moved from
   the :guilabel:`Group` menu to the :guilabel:`Energy` menu.


Aside from the default method described above, :demeter:`athena`
offers a few other algorithms for setting :procparam:`E0`.

**Tabulated atomic value**
    The tabulated value of the edge energy of the zero-valent element
    will be used. To determine the element, a transitory value for e0
    will be found using :demeter:`ifeffit`. Once :procparam:`Z` and
    :procparam:`Edge` are found, :procparam:`E0` is set to the
    tabulated value.
    
**Fraction of edge step**
    In this algorithm, a transitory value for E\ :sub:`0` will be
    found using :demeter:`ifeffit`. The data are normalized and the
    point on the edge which has a height equal to a specified fraction
    of the edge step is chosen as :procparam:`E0`. This normalization is iterated
    up to 5 times to settle on a stable value. The value of the
    fraction is set by the :configparam:`Bkg,fraction` preference,
    which is 0.5 by default.

**Zero crossing**
    Again, a transitory value for E\ :sub:`0` will be found using
    :demeter:`ifeffit`. The second derivative of |mu| (E) is computed and
    :demeter:`athena` searches in both directions in energy for the
    nearest zero-crossing of the second derivative, which is then used
    for :procparam:`e0`.

**Peak of L edge white line**
    A transitory value for E\ :sub:`0` will
    be found using :demeter:`ifeffit`. The peak of the white line is
    then found as the zero crossing of the first derivative of |mu| (E)
    after the initial value of E\ :sub:`0` and is used as :procparam:`e0`.

Since all of these additional algorithms rely on :demeter:`ifeffit`'s
initial guess of :procparam:`E0`, each is subject to the same caveats
given for the default algorithm.

The :configparam:`Bkg,e0` `configuration parameter
<../other/prefs.html>`__ can be set to one of these options, setting
the default algorithm for determining :procparam:`E0`.

Submenus under the :guilabel:`Group` menu can be used to set
:procparam:`E0` using one of these algorithms for all groups, or the
set of marked groups.

