=head1 NAME

An overview of Demeter's templating system.

=head1 VERSION

This documentation refers to Demeter version 0.9.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

      $string = $self->template($group, $template);
      $data -> dispose($string)

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Demeter uses L<Text::Template> to construct all text destined for
Ifeffit as well as for atoms and feff input files and the plotting
backends.  The use of templating system add a bit of complexity to
Demeter in the sense that the actual content of Ifeffit commands (or
input files) is generated quite far away from the location in the code
where that text is used.  However, the use of a templating system adds
a lot to Demeter.  Output can be highly customized or directed to a
different target altogether.  For example, it is already possible in
version 0.2 to generate content for a F<feffit.inp> file rather than
for an Ifeffit script.  In the future, templates will make it easy for
Demeter to target multiple plotting backends, write out functional
Demeter scripts, or upgrade to Ifeffit 2.0 (whenever that becomes
available).

L<Text::Template> is wonderful -- it hits a real sweet spot between
simple and powerful.  A template in this system is plain text with
snippets of perl code interspersed.  Here is an example:

   { # -*- ifm -*-
     # Forward transform template
     #   {$D} returns the ifeffit group name
     #   {$D->get(""parameter")} returns the value of that parameter
   }
   fftf({$D->group}.chi,
        k        = {$D}.k,
        kmin     = {$D->fft_kmin},
        kmax     = {$D->fft_kmax},
        dk       = {$D->fft_dk"},
        kwindow  = {$D->fft_kwindow},
        kweight  = {$D->get_kweight},
        rmax_out = {$D->rmax_out})

This is the template for generating a forward Fourier transform
command using the C<iff_columns> L<template set|/TEMPLATE SETS>.
Anything contained in curly brackets is interpreted as perl,
everything else is plain text that gets passed through the templating
system unaltered.

The way that this template gets used is like so:

  $data -> set_mode(template_process => "iff_columns");
  $string = $data -> template("process", "fft");
  $data -> dispose($string);

The first line chooses the L<template set|/TEMPLATE SETS>.  The second
line fills in the C<fft> template from the I<process> L<template
group|/TEMPLATE GROUPS> using the parameters of the Data objects
contained in C<$data>.  The C<template> method returns a string
containing the appropriate Ifeffit commands.  This string is
L<disposed|Demeter::Dispose> in the last line.

Demeter uses certain conventions to push particular data into a
template.  You can see two of those conventions in this example.
C<$D>, when used inside of curly braces, refers to the Data object of
the referent.  C<$P> refers to the current Plot object, which is
defined as the C<plot> mode parameter and
L<explained here|Demeter::Dispose/OTHER_USES_OF_set_mode>.

Within the curly braces, Demeter syntax is used and Demeter methods
are used to get data out of Demeetr objects.  Some templates contain
more complicated blocks of code, such as loops or control structures.
Most curly-brackets perl blocks are simply object accesses, such as in
the example above.

Here is a complete list of the special scalars for accessing Demeetr
objects in templates.

=over 4

=item C<$S>

This refers to the object that invoked the C<template> method.

=item C<$D>

This refers to the Data object associated with the object that invoked
the C<template> method.  For a Data object, C<$S> and C<$D> point at
the same object.  For a Path, SSPath, or VPath object, however, C<$D>
points at the Data object to which that Path object belongs.

=item C<$P>

This refers to the default Plot object.  This is the same object that
gets returned by C<po> method of the base class.

=item C<$C>

This refers to the Config object containing all the data from the
configuration subsystem.  Note that you should use the C<default> (or
possibly C<demeter>) method to access system configuration parameters.

The other use of C<$C> is to access user-defined parameters.  The
merge templates for example make extensive use of this to set, for
example, the boundaries of the merge range and the space in which the
merge takes place.  See L<Demeter::Config> for details on
setting user-defined Config parameetrs.  For user-defined parameters,
you should use the C<get> method.

=item C<$F>

This refers to the current Fit object.  Normally, the C<fit> or C<sum>
method of the L<Demeter::Fit> class will set the default for
you.

=item C<$DS>

This refers to the data object chosen as the data standard, as
L<explained here|Demeter::Dispose/OTHER_USES_OF_set_mode>.
Data processing methods such as C<align> will set the data standard so
that C<$DS> evaluates correctly in templates.

=item C<$T>

This refers to the active Feff object and is mostly used to generate
F<feff.inp> files.

=item C<$A>

This refers to the Atoms object from which a F<feff.inp> is being
generated.

=back

There is one final mechanism for moving data into a template.  This
method is quite similar to user-defined Config attributes, but may be
more convenient.  You can supply an additional argument to the
C<template> method which is an anonymous hash.  An example would be
the C<save_xmu> template from the I<process> tamplate group.  It is
called like so in C<save_xmu> in C<Demeter::Data::Mu>:

   my $string = $self->template("process", "save_xmu",
                                {filename => $filename,
				 titles   => "dem_data_*"});

The corresponding template looks like this:

  write_data(file="{$filename}", ${$titles}, ${$D->group}_title_*,
             {$D->group}.energy, {$D->group}.xmu, {$D->group}.bkg, {$D->group}.preline,
             {$D->group}.postline, {$D->group}.der, {$D->group}.sec)

Here the filename and titles glob are passed in the anonymous hash and
accessed in the template via their hash keys inside of curly brackets.

=head1 TEMPLATE GROUPS

Demeter has a lot of templates and they are grouped according to
general function as a way fo imposing some order on their large
numbers.  The (currently) five template groups are:

=over

=item I<analysis>

These templates are used for analysis chores that do not involve
Feff. Things such as linear combination fitting and difference
spectra go into this template group.

=item I<atoms>

These templates are used by the Atoms object to structure its output
files.  Although in the future I hope to use OpenBabel to direct lists
of atomic coordinates to differnt output targets, you could put a
template in this group to make, say, an alchemy file.

=item I<feff>

These templates are used to structure F<feff.inp> files made using
Feff objects as part of Demeter's rewrite of Feff fucntionality.

=item I<plot>

These templates are used to generate plotting commands from Data or
Path objects.

=item I<process>

All the rest of the templates go into this group.  Everything involved
in reading, writing, or processing data goes in this template group.

=back

=head1 TEMPLATE SETS

Within the different template groups, you may find multiple template
sets.

=over 4

=item I<feff>

The I<feff> template group has sets for "feff6", "feff7", and "feff8".
The feff template set is chosen by setting the C<template_feff> mode,
as L<explained here|Demeter::Dispose/OTHER_USES_OF_set_mode>.

=item I<plot>

The plotting template sets are "pgplot", "gnuplot", and "demeter".
The first two generate commands for the currently available plotting
backends.  The last is intended for use with the Demeter fitting and
processing template set.  In the future new sets may be written for
different plotting backends (for example, Grace would be a target that
would work very well within Demeter).  The plot template set is chosen
by setting the C<template_plot> mode, as L<explained
here|Demeter::Dispose/OTHER_USES_OF_set_mode>.

=item I<fit> and I<process>

Template sets exist for Ifeffit, Feffit, and Demeter.  There are two
version of the Ifeffit template set called "ifeffit" and
"iff_columns".  The first set uses a fairly terse style while the
second one tries to align ifeffit command arguments into columns
aligned at the equals sign wherever possible.  The second one may be a
bit more human readable.  The fit and process template sets are chosen
by setting the C<template_fit> and C<template_process> modes, as
L<explained here|Demeter::Dispose/OTHER_USES_OF_set_mode>.

=back

Atoms does not use template sets and currently there is only an
ifeffit set for the I<analysis> group.

=head1 DIAGNOSTICS

=over 4

=item C<Unknown Demeter template file: group $group; type $file; $tmpl>

You specified a combination of template group and template file that
does not exist.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION AND ENVIRONMENT

See L<Demeter::Config> for details about the configuration
system.

=head1 DEPENDENCIES

The dependencies of the Demeter system are in the
F<Bundle/DemeterBundle.pm> file.

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

=over 4

New template sets:

=item *

More plotting backends?  Grace?  others?

=item *

tdl/ifeffit 2.0 target

=back

Please report problems to Bruce Ravel (bravel AT bnl DOT gov)

Patches are welcome.

=head1 AUTHOR

Bruce Ravel (bravel AT bnl DOT gov)

http://cars9.uchicago.edu/~ravel/software/


=head1 LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2006-2012 Bruce Ravel (bravel AT bnl DOT gov). All rights reserved.

This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. See L<perlgpl>.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=cut
