
=head1 NAME

Hephaestus -- A souped-up periodic table for the X-ray absorption spectroscopist

=head1 VERSION

This documentation refers to Demeter version 0.9.15.

=head1 OVERVIEW

    In his workshop he has handmaidens he has forged out of gold
    who can move and who help him in his work. ...  With Athena,
    [Hephaestus is] important in the life of the city.  The two
    [are] the patrons of handicrafts, the arts which along with
    agriculture are the support of civilization.
                                 Mythology, Edith Hamilton

Hephaestus is a program for making calculations useful to the XAS
experimentalist using a periodic table, tables of X-ray absorption
coefficients, and other elemental data.

On the left of the Hephaestus window is a stack of icons which are
used to select the different tools.  Clicking on one of the icons
enables that tool.

At the bottom of the Hephaestus window is a status bar which
Hephaestus uses to convey information during the course of operation.
Along with information about the most recently completed calculation,
the status bar shows topical information.  As the mouse passes over an
element in the periodic table, the element name, symbol, and Z number
are displayed.  In the Absorption tool, clicking on an edge or line
energy will display that energy in wavelength units in the status
bar.  In the Standards tool, some information about the plotted data
is displayed in the status bar.

The "Tools" menu in the menu bar provides another way of navigating
between the tools.  The mouse can be used, as can the keyboard.
"Alt-t" posts the "Tools" menu and  the arrow keys can be used to
navigate among the entries.  "Alt-e" and "Alt-h" post the "Hephaestus"
and "Help" menus.

=head1 TOOLS

=head2 Absorption

This is the start page for Hephaestus and is used to display
information about edge and line energies for the elements.

A periodic table is displayed atop three lists that will be filled in
with data associated with an element.  Clicking on an element in the
periodic table displays data about that element.

The "data" table will be filled with some basic information
about the element, including its name and Z number, its atomic weight,
and bulk density under standard temperature and pressure.
Beneath this table are two controls for determining the appropriate
Z-1 or Z-2 filter to use in a fluorescence experiment.  The "Filter"
text box will be filled with the likeliest candidate for the element
selected from the periodic table.  This can be edited by hand.
Clicking the "Plot filter" button will display a plot showing the
relative locations of the edge energy, the dominant fluorescence
lines, and the filter edge energy.

The "edges" table shows the value in eV of each edge associated with
the element selected from the periodic table and the core-hole
lifetime in eV of each edge.  Clicking on a line in this table will
display a message in the status bar giving the edge energy expressed in
wavelength units and the core-hole lifetime expressed in approximate
time units.  Double clicking on a line will highlight all fluorescence
lines associated with that edge in the "lines" table.

The "lines" table shows the transitions and emission energies in eV of
every line associated with the element selected from the periodic
table.  Also shown is the approximate strength, or branching ratio, of
each line.  The strengths for all lines associated with a particular
edge will sum to 1.  Clicking on a line in this table will display a
message in the status bar giving the emission energy expressed in
wavelength units.

The rules for the selection of the filter elements are:

=over 4

=item 1

For elements below Z=38, assume the K edge is being measured and use
the Z-1 element. 

=item 2

For elements between Z=39 and Z=57, assume the K edge is being measured
and use the Z-2 element.

=item 3

Use Br for a Rb absorber because Kr is a silly filter material.

=item 4

Use Rh for a Ru absorber because nobody wants a Tc filter!

=item 5

Use I for a Ba absorber because Xe is also a silly filter material.

=item 6

For elements above Z=57, assume the L3 edge is being measured.  Use the
first element whose K edge is more than 90 eV above the Lalpha1 line
of the absorber.

=item 7

Use Rb for a U or Np absorber because Kr is still a silly filter material.

=item 8

For elements below Z=24 (chromium), no filter choice is given.
Filters for lower-Z elements are not used because no element exists
with a K-edge between the line and absorption energies of the
absorber.

=back

=head2 Formulas

This tool is used to compute approximate absorption lengths for common
or user-specified materials.  To the left is a list of materials
commonly found at synchrotron beamlines.  Clicking one of those items
inserts its stoichiometric formula into the "Formula" box and the
density into the "Density" box.

At the top of the right hand part of this tool are controls for
entering the parameters of the absorption length calculation.  The
formula must be a stoichiometric formula using a few simple rules.

=over 4

=item 1

Element symbols must be first letter capitalized.

=item 2

White space is unimportant -- it will be removed from the string.  So
will dollar signs, underscores, and curly braces (in an attempt to
handle TeX).  Also a sequence like this: '/sub 3/' will be converted
to '3' (in an attempt to handle INSPEC).

=item 3

Numbers can be integers or floating point numbers.  Things like 5,
0.5, 12.87, and .5 are all acceptable, as is exponential notation like
1e-2.  Note that exponential notation must use a leading number to
avoid confusion with element symbols.  That is, 1e-2 is OK, but e-2 is
not.

=item 4

Uncapitalized symbols or unrecognized symbols will flag an error.

=item 5

An error will be flagged if the number of open parentheses is different
from the number of close parentheses.

=item 6

An error will be flagged if any unusual symbols are found in the string.

=back

The density is entered in units of specific gravity or grams per
cubic centimeter.  Alternately units of molarity can be used by
selecting that from the choice menu.

Finally, the calculation requires an energy in eV at which to make t
the calculation.

Here is an example of the results printed for BN, with a density of
2.29 and at energy of 9000 eV:


      element   number   barns/atom     cm^2/gm
     --------- ----------------------------------
        B	     1.000	30.084	      1.676
        N	     1.000     123.417	      5.306
    
    This weighs 24.819 amu.
    
    Absorption length = 0.117 cm at 9000 eV.
    
    A sample of 1 absorption length with area of 1 square
    cm requires 268.486 milligrams of sample at 9000.00 eV.
    
    The Elam database and the full cross-sections were
    used in the calculation.

This tells us that 9000 eV photons will be e-fold attenuated (about
67%) in just over 1 millimeter of packed BN.  To make a sample with an
area of 1 square centimeter facing the beam and which has an
absorption length of 1, one must weigh out about 270 milligrams of BN.

=head2 Ion Chambers

This tool is used to determine appropriate contents of ion chambers at
a given energy.  The calculation requires several parameters,
including

=over 4

=item 1

The length in centimeters of the ion chamber.  This can be selected
from a list of common lengths or supplied by the user.

=item 2

The relative fractions of two gasses mixed together in the ion
chambers.  Each can be selected from a list which includes H2, N2, Ar,
Ne, Kr, and Xe.

=item 3

The pressure of the gas inside the ion chamber, in Torr.  Atmospheric
pressure is 760 Torr.

=back

The percentage absorbed by the ion chamber will usually auto-update as
you change the parameters.  Clicking the "Compute" button forces an
update.  Clicking the "Reset" button returns all the parameters to
their initial values.

As a rule of thumb, 10% is a good amount of absorption for the I0
chamber.  This will allow for a good measurement of incidence flux
while leaving most photons for the rest of the measurement.  66% is a
good amount for the It, Ir, and If chambers.  This distributes the
absorption over the entire length of the ion chamber.  In the case of
It, this leaves enough photons passing through to the reference
chamber to allow for a reasonable measurement on Ir.

If you know the amplifier gain and voltage signal coming from your
current-to-voltage amplifier (such as a Keithley 527 or 528),
specifying these will compute a crude calculation of photon flux
incident upon the chamber.

           e * energy * flux * gain
      V = --------------------------
              IonizationEnergy

The ionization energy is about 32 volts for most gasses and the
electron charge C<e> is about 1.6E-19 Coulombs. 

=head2 Data

This tool is used to display a number of useful physical and chemical
properties of the elements.  Selecting an element from the periodic
table will fill in the table with the data for that element.

=head2 Transitions

This tool displays a non-interactive chart explaining the transitions
for each of the emission lines.  The initial and final states for each
named K and L transition is shown.  The chart follows Figure 1.1 in
the Center for X-Ray Optics X-Ray Data Booklet.

=head2 Edge Finder

This tool displays a table, ordered by increasing edge energy, of all
edge energies on the periodic table.  The table also shows the edge
energies in wavelength units and the core-hole lifetimes.

The purpose of this tool is to aid in identifying edges observed during
measurements.  To search the list, enter an energy in the text box on
the right and click search (or hit return).  The list will be
recentered around that energy.  Hopefully this will help you identify
the mysterious feature in your measured data!

You can also search for edges at the second or third harmonic of the
energy.  This can be useful in the case of poor harmonic rejection in
the incident beam and the excitation of a much higher energy edge.

=head2 Line Finder

This tool displays a table, ordered by increasing emission energy, of
all emission line energies on the periodic table.  The table also
shows the emission energies in wavelength units and the strength (or
branching ratio) of each line relative to the other lines arising from
the same absorption edge.

The purpose of this tool is to aid in identifying emission lines
observed during measurements.  To search the list, enter an energy in
the text box on the right and click search (or hit return).  The list
will be recentered around that energy.  Hopefully this will help you
identify the mysterious line in your fluorescence data!

=head2 Standards

Demeter is distributed with a small library of data on standard
materials.  These XANES spectra can be access via this tool.  You will
find that this library is quite tiny at this time.  The hope is that a
future effort in an XAS standards library will take off.  When that
happens, this will be Hephaestus' interface to that effort.

Clicking on an element in the periodic table displays a list of all
the standards in the library measured for that element.  The disabled
elements in the periodic table are ones for which the library has no
entries. 

The XANES data can be plotted as normalized mu(E) or as the derivative
of mu(E).  The data present have all been annotated so that
interesting points are marked on the plots.

The "Save" button will prompt for a file name and save the mu(E) data
to a file.

One point of this tool is to make obsolete the "Reference Spectra"
printout from EXAFS Materials that is found at many beamlines.
(C<http://exafsmaterials.com/Ref_Spectra_0.4MB.pdf>)

=head2 F' and F"

This tool plots the complex anomalous scattering data from the
Cromer-Liberman tables as a function of energy.  The start and end
energies for the plot are entered, as well as the energy grid
spacing.  When an element is selected from the periodic table, it's f'
and f" values are plotted.

Anomalous scattering for elements can be plotted alone or over-plotted
with other elements.  You can also select to plot either f', f", or
both.

The f' and f" data can be save to a file.

=head2 Preferences

The behavior of Hephaestus can be configured via the preferences
tool.  This uses the same preferences tool as Athena and Artemis,
although only those preference groups relevant to Hephaestus and to
plotting are presented.

Click on a group in the "Parameters" list to open a group.  Click on a
parameter to display it in the controls on the right. You will be
given controls appropriate to each parameter's data type for setting
the parameter value.  The "Your value" and "Demeter's value" buttons
can be used to restore a parameter's value.  A description of the
displayed parameter will be written in the large text box.

Parameters can be applied for the current session or applied and saved
to your configuration file. 

=head1 CREDITS

=over 4

=item *

The layout of Hephaestus -- with its button bar on the left side which
changes the mode of the main part of the program -- was inspired by
the personal information management program I use on my KDE systems,
Kontact. I found it effective so I swiped it for this program.

=item *

The pictures used on the buttons were cropped from images I found
using Google The picture of the ion chamber is from the Advanced
Designed Consulting web site.  Their ion chambers are quite nice.  The
edge finder icon was swiped from the F<find.png> icon in the kid's
icon theme for KDE.  The line finder icon is from a web page by the
Alberta Synchrotron Institute and depicts a fluorescence map of some
rock.  The documentation icon was found under a Creative Commons
license at C<http://battellemedia.com/archives/001952.php>

=item *

The formulas utility owes much to Gerry Roe, who pointed out a bug,
and Erik Gullikson, whose similar utility on the web set me straight.

=item *

The information used in the chemical data utility is from the
kalziumrc file, which was swiped from the Kalzium package.  See
C<http://edu.kde.org/kalzium/> for more details.  The data for
Mossbauer active isotopes was taken from C<http://www.mossbauer.org>

=item *

The ion chamber and edge finder utilities were inspired by the similar
utilities in the data acquisition program by Lars Fuerenlid and Johnny
Kirkland and in wide use at NSLS.  Lars and Johnny seem to have a
deeper love of pastel than do I.

=item *

The electronic transitions chart was created from scratch but
slavishly following Figure 1.1 in the Center for X-Ray Optics X-Ray
Data Booklet.

=item *

Hephaestus makes use of the and several things from
C<http://www.cpan.org>

=item *

And, of course, the users of my various software efforts deserve all
the credit for kind praise and useful feedback over these many years.

=back

The absorption data resources all have literature references.

=over 4

=item The Elam tables

W.T. Elam, B.Ravel, and J.R. Sieber, I<Radiat. Phys. Chem.> B<63>
(2002) pp. 121-128 This is the source of data for the edge and line
finders and for the filter plot.

=item The McMaster tables

W.H. McMaster et al., I<Compilation of X-ray Cross Sections. Lawrence
Radiation Laboratory Report> UCRL-50174, pub: "National Bureau of
Standards" (1969).  These data were originally compiled in machine
readable form by Pathikrit Bandyopadhyay.

=item The Henke tables

B. L. Henke, E. M. Gullikson, and J. C. Davis, I<Atomic Data and
Nuclear Data Tables">. B<54> (1993).  The data is available at
C<http://www-cxro.lbl.gov/optical_constants/>.

=item The Chantler tables

C. T. Chantler, I<J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data> B<24>, (1995) p. 71.  The
data files can be found at
C<http://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/FFast/html/form.html>

=item The Cromer-Liberman tables

S. Brennan and P.L. Cowen, I<Rev. Sci. Instrum.> B<63> (1992) p. 850

=item The Shaltout tables

A. Shaltout, H. Ebel and R. Svagera, I<X-Ray Spectrom.>
B<35> (2006), pp. 52-56

=back

=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

Every calculation at high energy is inaccurate in Hephaestus.
Xray::Absorption does not correctly handle the mass-energy absorption
coefficients at high energy, although the ion chamber utility does
attempt a (very) crude correction.

More types of information can be added to the chemical data utility.
If there is something you would like to see, you should send the data
in an easily readable format (i.e. plain text is lovely).  Merely
suggesting new data types is unlikely to have any effect.  Supplying
the data is highly likely to have an effect.

My wish list includes auger/fluorescence branching ratios in one of
the periodic table utilities and providing the Berger/Hubble XCOM
tables and Feff's optical calculations as data resources.

Please report problems to Bruce Ravel (bravel AT bnl DOT gov)

Patches are welcome.

=head1 AUTHOR

Bruce Ravel (bravel AT bnl DOT gov)

C<https://github.com/bruceravel/demeter>

=head1 LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2008-2013 Bruce Ravel (bravel AT bnl DOT gov). All rights reserved.

This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.  See 
C<http://perldoc.perl.org/perlgpl.html>

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=cut
